# TEXT-SUMMARIZATION-TOOL

*COMPANY* : CODTECH IT SOLUTIONS

*NAME* : KHAJA TAUQEERUDDIN

*INTERN ID* : CODF61

*DOMAIN* : ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

*DURATION* : 4 WEEKS

*MENTOR* : NEELA SANTOSH KUMAR

The Text Summarization Tool that i  have developed is a full-featured, web-based application built on Python’s Flask microframework that empowers users to effortlessly
transform large volumes of text into concise, coherent summaries by offering both extractive and abstractive summarization strategies through a single, streamlined
interface; upon navigating to the root URL, users are greeted by a minimalist HTML form containing a spacious textarea for pasting or typing any block of source text, 
a clear set of radio buttons (or a dropdown) to choose between extractive summarization—where the system applies classical NLP techniques such as sentence tokenization,
stopword removal via NLTK, TF-IDF weighting, and graph-based ranking algorithms like TextRank to score sentences and then extract the highest-scoring ones in their 
original order—and abstractive summarization—where the system loads a pretrained encoder-decoder transformer model (for example, T5 or BART from Hugging Face’s 
Transformers library running on PyTorch), encodes the full text into embeddings, generates novel sentences using beam search or sampling, and decodes them back into
grammatically coherent prose that captures the essence of the original; when the user submits the form, a single Flask route handles the POST request by retrieving
the input text and chosen method from `request.form`, delegating processing to modular functions (`extractive_summary` or `abstractive_summary`) that reside in
separate Python modules to ensure separation of concerns and future extensibility, and then re-renders the same template—`index.html`—with context variables for both
the original text and the generated summary so that users can immediately compare side by side without losing their input, while the application gracefully handles 
invalid or empty inputs by returning informative error messages; the project’s dependencies—listed in `requirements.txt` (including Flask, transformers, torch, and
nltk)—ensure reproducible environments across developers and production servers and can be installed via `pip install -r requirements.txt`, and the application can be
launched locally with `python app.py` in debug mode to benefit from Flask’s auto-reload feature, allowing rapid iteration on code changes; for testing and integration
purposes, the tool also supports API-style access via cURL or Postman by sending POST requests directly to the endpoint with form-data fields named `input_text` and
`method`, and you have written unit tests using pytest to validate key behaviors—such as confirming that extractive summaries contain a predetermined set of keywords
or that abstractive summaries adhere to target length constraints—and you have built in performance optimizations such as chunking or truncating very long inputs to
respect model token limits (e.g., 512 or 1,024 tokens) and avoid timeouts, as well as considered caching mechanisms (with Flask-Cache or Redis) to store recent
summaries in memory and reduce redundant computation; the code architecture is highly modular—separating web routing, front-end templates, and summary algorithms 
so that adding new summarization techniques (for instance, a hybrid approach combining extractive and abstractive elements, a topic-driven summarizer, or a 
domain-specific fine-tuned model) requires minimal changes: you simply implement a new function in its own module and add a corresponding branch in the route handler
without altering the front-end or existing modules; looking forward, the project is primed for enhancements such as integrating on-the-fly summary qualitymetrics
(e.g., computing ROUGE and BLEU scores and displaying them alongside the summary), implementing user authentication and persistence layers (allowing users to save,
retrieve, and download past summaries via a database backend), and exposing RESTful JSON endpoints for programmatic access by other applications or services; further
improvements might include advanced NLP preprocessing—such as coreference resolution to ensure pronouns and named entities remain coherent in abstractive outputs,
named-entity recognition to preserve critical information, and custom fine-tuning of transformer models on domain-specific corpora (for example, medical or legal text)
to boost relevance and accuracy in specialized fields—as well as front-end refinements like adding a progress bar or loading spinner for long-running jobs, mobile-
responsive design tweaks, and integration with JavaScript frameworks (e.g., React or Vue) for a more dynamic user experience; when it comes time to deploy, the
application can be containerized using Docker for consistent environments across development, staging, and production, orchestrated via Docker Compose or Kubernetes, 
and hosted on cloud platforms such as Heroku, AWS Elastic Beanstalk, Google Cloud Run, or Azure App Service, complete with SSL certificates for secure HTTPS access,
environment variables to manage secret keys and API tokens, monitoring via tools like Prometheus and Grafana, and horizontal scaling to handle increased traffic;
overall, your Text Summarization Tool exemplifies a clean, maintainable codebase that democratizes access to powerful NLP techniques—bridging the gap between classical
extractive algorithms and cutting-edge transformer-based abstractive models—and presents them through a lightweight yet flexible web interface that can serve a broad
audience ranging from academic researchers and journalists to students and business professionals, all seeking an intuitive, “one-click” solution to distill vast
amounts of information into digestible insights.

*OUTPUT
![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6a24ef24-6f73-4947-957c-35d068e3ffbe)
